---
layout: presentation 
title: A Five-Minute Introduction to Compass 
---
<section>
    <h1 class="visible">A Five-Minute Introduction to Compass</h1>
</section>

<section>
h2. We have a problem.

h3(step). CSS is complicated.
</section>

<section>
<ul>
    <li>Want to change one of the major colors your site uses?</li>
    <li class="step">Want an element to be sized relative to another element?</li>
    <li class="step">Want to serve a single stylesheet for performance reasons, but keep your styles organized in different files?</li>
    <li class="step">Want to establish a consistent vertical rhythm?</li>
</ul>
</section>

<section>
h2. It's all possible.

h3(step). It's just a _pain_.
</section>

<section>
h2.  We have a problem.

h2(step). CSS is getting <em>more</em> complicated.

{% highlight css %}
body {
  font-size: 24px;
  line-height: 48px;
  background-color: #121c21;
  color: #9cbac9;
  font-family: 'ExistenceLight';
  background-image: url(/images/noise.png), -webkit-gradient(radial, circle farthest-corner, 0, circle farthest-corner, 100, color-stop(0%, rgba(36, 56, 66, 0.8)), color-stop(100%, rgba(18, 28, 33, 0.9)));
  background-image: url(/images/noise.png), -webkit-radial-gradient(circle farthest-corner, rgba(36, 56, 66, 0.8), rgba(18, 28, 33, 0.9));
  background-image: url(/images/noise.png), -moz-radial-gradient(circle farthest-corner, rgba(36, 56, 66, 0.8), rgba(18, 28, 33, 0.9));
  background-image: url(/images/noise.png), -o-radial-gradient(circle farthest-corner, rgba(36, 56, 66, 0.8), rgba(18, 28, 33, 0.9));
  background-image: url(/images/noise.png), -ms-radial-gradient(circle farthest-corner, rgba(36, 56, 66, 0.8), rgba(18, 28, 33, 0.9));
  background-image: url(/images/noise.png), radial-gradient(circle farthest-corner, rgba(36, 56, 66, 0.8), rgba(18, 28, 33, 0.9));
  overflow-x: hidden;
}
{% endhighlight %}
</section>

<section>

h2. Compass is a framework for removing the *pain* from CSS.

</section>

<section>

h2. "Want to change one of the major colors your site uses?"

h3(step). SASS gives us *variables*.
</section>

<section>
{% highlight sass %}
$backgroundColor: hsl( 200, 20%, 20% );
$color: hsl( 200, 90%, 50% );

body {
    background-color: $backgroundColor;
    color: $color;
}

h1 {
    color: complement( $color );
}

h2 {
    color: lighten( $color, 10% );
}

p {
    color: $color;
}

strong {
    color: adjust-hue( $color, 100deg );
}
{% endhighlight %}
</section>

<section>

h2. "Want an element to be sized relative to another element?"

h3(step). SASS gives us *operations*.

</section>

<section>
{% highlight sass %}
$container: 600px;
$spacing: 20px;
$rightRail: ( $container / 3 ) - $spacing;
$river: ( 2 * ( $container / 3 ) ) - $spacing;

.container {
    width: $container;
}

.river,
.right-rail {
    margin: $spacing / 2;
}

.river {
    width: $river;
}

.right-rail {
    width: $rightRail;
}
{% endhighlight %}
</section>
